Pointers are one of the core components of the C programming language. A pointer can be used to store the memory address of other variables, functions, or even other pointers. 
The use of pointers allows low-level memory access, dynamic memory allocation, and many other functionality in C.

What is a Pointer in C?

A pointer is defined as a derived data type that can store the address of other C variables or a memory location. We can access and manipulate the data stored in that memory location using pointers.


As the pointers in C store the memory addresses, their size is independent of the type of data they are pointing to. This size of pointers in C only depends on the system 
architecture. If you’re looking to master pointers, especially how they work with data structures, the C Programming Course Online with Data Structures offers a comprehensive 
breakdown of this concept.

Syntax of C Pointers
The syntax of pointers is similar to the variable declaration in C, but we use the ( * ) dereferencing operator in the pointer declaration.

datatype * ptr;
where

ptr is the name of the pointer.
datatype is the type of data it is pointing to.

How to Use Pointers?
The use of pointers in C can be divided into three steps:

Pointer Declaration
Pointer Initialization
Pointer Dereferencing
1. Pointer Declaration
In pointer declaration, we only declare the pointer but do not initialize it. To declare a pointer, we use the ( * ) dereference operator before its name.

Example

int *ptr;
The pointer declared here will point to some random memory address as it is not initialized. Such pointers are called wild pointers.

2. Pointer Initialization
Pointer initialization is the process where we assign some initial value to the pointer variable. We generally use the ( &: ampersand ) addressof operator to get the memory 
address of a variable and then store it in the pointer variable.

Example

int var = 10;
int * ptr;
ptr = &var;
We can also declare and initialize the pointer in a single step. This method is called pointer definition as the pointer is declared and initialized at the same time.

Example

int *ptr = &var;
Note: It is recommended that the pointers should always be initialized to some value before starting using it. Otherwise, it may lead to number of errors.


3. Pointer Dereferencing
Dereferencing a pointer is the process of accessing the value stored in the memory address specified in the pointer. We use the same ( * ) dereferencing operator that we 
used in the pointer declaration.








